This is a LibriVox recording. All the LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For more
information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Dr C. Wood's Diary, 30th September. I got home at five o'clock, and found that
Godelming and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript of
various diaries and letters, which Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the
Carrier's Men, of whom Dr Hennessy had written to me. Mrs Harker gave us a cup of tea, and
I can honestly say that, for the first time since I have lived in it, this old house seemed
like home. When we had finished tea, Mrs Harker said,
Dr C. Wood, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, Mr Renfield. Do let me see
him. What you have said of him in your diary interests me so much.
She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could not refuse her, and there was no possible
reason why I should, so I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man
that a lady would like to see him, to which he simply answered, Why? She is going through
the house and wants to see everyone in it, I said. Oh, very well, he said. Let her come
in by all means, but just wait a minute till I tidy up the place.
His method of tidying was peculiar. He simply swallowed all of the flies and spiders in
the boxes before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was jealous
of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully, Let
the lady come in, and sat down on the edge of his bed with his head down, but with his
eyelids raised so that he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought he might
have some homicidal intent. I remembered how quiet he had been just before he attacked
me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I could seize him at once, if he attempted
to make a spring at her. She came into the room with an easy gracefulness, which would
at once command the respect of any lunatic, for reasonness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him smiling pleasantly, and held out her hand.
Good evening, Mr. Renfield, said she. You see, I know you, for Dr. Seaworth has told
me of you. He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all over intently, with a set frown
on his face. This look gave away to one of wonder, which merged in doubt. Then to my
intense astonishment he said, You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you?
You can't be, you know, for she's dead. Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied, Oh no,
I have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever saw Dr. Seaworth, or
he me, I and Mrs. Harker. Then what are you doing here? My husband and I are staying on
a visit with Dr. Seaworth. Then don't stay. But why not? I thought that this style of
conversation might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker any more than it was to me, so I joined
in. How did you know I wanted to marry anyone? His reply was simply contemptuous, given in
a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs. Harker to me, instantly turning them back
again. What an asinine question! I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield, said Mrs. Harker,
at once championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as he had
shown contempt to me. You will of course understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is so loved and
honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of interest in our little community.
Dr. Seaworth is loved not only by his household and his friends, but even by his patients,
who, being some of them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and effects. Since
I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I cannot but notice that the sophisticated
tendencies of some of his inmates lean towards the errors of non-causer and ignoratio elench.
I positively opened my eyes at this new development. Here was my own pet lunatic, the most pronounced
of his type that I had ever met with, talking elemental philosophy, and with the manner
of a polished gentleman. I wonder if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched some
memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way due to her unconscious influence,
she must have some rare gift or power.
We continued to talk for some time, and seeing that he was seemingly quite reasonable, she
ventured, looking at me questioningly as she began to lead him to his favourite topic.
I was again astonished, for he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of the
completest sanity. He even took himself as an example when he mentioned certain things.
Why I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no wonder
that my friends were alarmed and insisted on my being put under control. I used to fancy
that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of living
things, no matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. At times I held the belief so strongly that I had actually tried to take a human
life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I tried to kill him for the
purpose of strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my own body of his
life through the medium of his blood, relying of course upon the scriptural phrase, for
the blood is the life. Though indeed the vendor of a certain nostrum has vulgarised the truism
to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true, doctor?
I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what to either think or say,
it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat up his spiders and flies not five minutes
before. Looking at my watch, I saw that I should go to the station to meet Van Helsing,
and I told Mrs Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying pleasantly
to Mr Renfield, good-bye, and I hope that I may see you often under auspices pleasanter
to yourself. To which, to my astonishment, he replied, good-bye, my dear, I pray God I
may never see your sweet face again. May he bless and keep you.
When I went to the station to meet Van Helsing, I left the boys behind me.
Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincy is more
like his own bright self than he has been for many a long day. Van Helsing stepped from the
carriage with the eager nimbleness of a boy. He saw me at once and rushed up to me, saying,
Ah, friends John, how goes all? Well, so, I have been busy, for I come here to stay if need be.
All affairs are settled with me, and I have much to tell.
Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend Quincy,
they are with you too? Good. As I drove to the house, I told him of what had passed,
and of how my own diary had come to be of some use through Mrs Harker's suggestion,
at which the Professor interrupted me. Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has a man's brain,
a brain that a man should have were he much gifted, and a woman's heart.
The good God fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when he made that so good combination.
Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us, after tonight she must not
have to do with this so terrible affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
determined, nay, are we not pledged to destroy this monster? But it is no part for a woman.
Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her in so much and so many horrors,
and hereafter she may suffer, both in walking from her nerves, and in sleep from her dreams.
And besides, she is young woman, and not so long married. There may be other things to think of
some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she must consult with us,
but to-morrow we say good-bye to this work, and we go alone. I agreed heartily with him,
and then I told him what we had found in his absence, that the house which Dracula had bought
was the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed to come on him.
Oh, that we had known it before, he said, for then we might have reached him in time to save
poor Lucy. However, the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards, as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end. Then he fell into silence that lasted till we entered
my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for dinner, he said to Mrs Harker, I am told,
by my friend John, that you and your husband have put up in exact order all things that have been
up to this moment. Not up to this moment, Professor, she said impulsively, but up to
this morning. But why not up till now? We have seen hitherto how good light all of the little
things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who was told is the worst for it.
Mrs Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pocket, she said,
Dr Van Helsing, will you read this and tell me if it must go in? It is my record of today.
I too have seen the need of putting down at present everything, however trivial,
but there is little in this, except what is personal. Must it go in?
The Professor read it over gravely, and handed it back, saying,
It need not go in if you do not wish it, but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband
love you the more, and all us your friends more honour you, as well as more esteem and love.
She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, up to this very hour,
all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after
dinner, and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us have already
read everything, so when we meet in the study, we shall all be informed as to facts, and can
arrange our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy.
Mina Harker's Journal 30th September
When we met in Dr Seawood's study two hours after dinner, which had been at six o'clock,
we unconsciously formed a sort of board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the
head of the table, to which Dr Seawood motioned him as he came into the room. He made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary. Jonathan sat next to me. Oppositors
were Lord Godelming, Dr Seawood and Mr Morris, Lord Godelming being next to the Professor,
and Dr Seawood in the centre. The Professor said,
I may, I suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts that are in these papers.
We all expressed assent, and he went on. Then it were, I think, good that I tell you something of
the kind of enemy with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you something of the
history of this man, which has been ascertained for me, so we can then discuss how we shall act,
and can take our measure according.
There are such beings as vampires. Some of us have evidence that they exist.
Even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience, the teachings and the records of
the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the first I was sceptic. Were it
not that through long years I have trained myself to keep an open mind, I could not have believed
until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. See, see, I prove, I prove. Alas, had I known at
first what now I know, nay, had I even guessed at him, one so precious life had been spared to many
of us who did love her. But that is gone, and we must so work that other poor souls perish not,
whilst we can save. The Nosferatu do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger,
and being stronger have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us of himself
is so strong in person as twenty men. He is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the
growth of ages, and have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply,
the divination of the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are for him at command. He is
more than brute, he is devil in callous, and the heart of him is not. He can, within his range,
direct the elements, the storm, the fog, the thunder, he can command all the meaner things,
the rat, and the owl, and the bat, the moth, and the fox, and the wolf, and he can grow and
become small, and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we to begin our strike to
destroy him? How shall we find his where, and having found it, how can we destroy? My friends,
this is much. It is a terrible task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make
the brave shudder. For if we fail in this, our fight. He must surely win, and then where end we?
Life is nothing's, I heed him not. But to fail here is not mere life or death. It is that we
come as him, that we henceforward become foul things of the night like him, without heart or
conscience, praying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us forever are the gates
of heaven shut, for who shall open them to us again? We go on for all time abhorred by all,
a blot on the face of God's sunshine, an arrow in the side of him who died for man.
But we are face to face with duty, and in such case we must shrink. For me, I say no, but then I am
old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his songs of birds, his music and his love, lie
far behind. You others are young, some have seen sorrow, but there are fair days yet in store.
What say you? Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so much, that the
appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I saw his hand stretch out. But it was life
to me to feel its touch, so strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for
itself. It does not even need a woman's love to hear its music. When the Professor had done
speaking, my husband looked into my eyes, and I in his. There was no need for speaking between us.
I answer for Mina and myself, he said. Count me in, Professor, said Mr Quincy Morris,
laconically as usual. I am with you, said Lord Godelming, for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason.
Dr Seawood simply nodded. The Professor stood up, and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table,
held out his hand on either side. I took his right hand, and Lord Godelming his left.
Jonathan held my right, with his left, and stretched across to Mr Morris.
So as we all took hands, our solemn compact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not
even occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr Van Helsing went on with a sort
of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be taken as gravely,
and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life.
Well, you know what we have to contend against, but we too are not without strength.
We have on our side power of combination, a power denied to the vampire kind. We have sources of
science. We are free to act and think, and the hours of the day and the night are ours equally.
In fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are free to use them.
We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to achieve, which is not a selfish one. These
things are much. Now, let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are restrict,
and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the limitations of the vampire in general,
and this one in particular. All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions.
These do not at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and death,
nay of more than life and death. Yet must we be satisfied, in the first place because we have to
be, no other means is at our control. And secondly, because after all these things, tradition and
superstition are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others, though not, alas,
for us on them? A year ago, which of us would have received such a possibility in the midst of our
scientific, sceptical, matter-of-fact 19th century? We even scouted a belief that we saw justified
under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the vampire, and the belief in his limitations and
his cure, rest for the moment on some base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome, he flourished in Germany all over, in France,
in India, even in the Germanies, and in China, so far from us in all ways. There even is he,
and the people's for him at this day. He have followed the wake of the berserker Icelander,
the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we have all we may act upon,
and let me tell you that very much of the beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so
unhappy experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the time. He can
flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that
he can grow younger, that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though they refresh
themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet. He eat
not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him eat, never.
He throws no shadow, he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan observe. He has the
strength of many of his hand, witness again Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolves,
and when he help him from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather from
the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog. He can be as a bat, as Madame Mina saw him on
the window at Whitby, and as friend John saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend
Quincy saw him in the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create, that noble ships
kept improved him of this, but from what we know the distance he can make this mist is limited,
and it can only be round himself. He come on moonlight rays as elemental dust, as again
Jonathan saw those sisters in the castle of Dracula. He becomes so small, we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, as she was at peace, slip through a hair breadth space at the tomb door. He can,
when once he find his way, come out from anything or into anything, no matter how close it be bound,
or even fused up with fire, soldier you call it. He can see in the dark, no small power this,
in a world which is one half shut from the light. Ah, but hear me through, he can do all these things,
yet he is not free. Nay, he is even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in
his cell. He cannot go where he lists. He who is not of nature has yet to obey some nature's laws.
Why, we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the household
who bid him to come, though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of
all evil things, at the coming of the day. Only at certain times can he have limited freedom.
If he be not at the place whether he is bound, he can only change himself at noon, or exact sunrise,
or sunset. These things we are told, and in this record of ours we have proof by inference. Thus,
whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he have his earth home, his coffin home,
his hell home, the place unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicide at Whitby,
still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is said, too,
that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood of the tide. Then there are things
which so afflict him that he has no power, as the garlic that we know of, and as for things sacred,
as this symbol, my crucifix. That was amongst us even now when we resolve. To them he is nothing,
but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too,
which I shall tell you of, lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he may not move from it. A sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so
that he be true dead. And as for the stake through him, we know already of its peace,
or the cut-off head that giveth rest. We have seen it with our own eyes. Thus, when we find the
habitation of this man that was, we can confine him to his coffin and destroy him if we obey what
we know. But he is clever. I have asked my friend Arminius of Budapest University to make his record,
and from all the means that are, he tell me of what he has been. He must indeed have been
that Vierveau de Dracula, who won his name against the Turk over the great river on the
very frontier of Turkeyland. If it be so, then was he no common man, for in that time and for
centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the most cunning, as well as the bravest of
the sons of the land beyond the forest. That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with
him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius,
a great and noble race, though now and again were Scions who held by their Kovels to have had
dealings with the evil one. They learned his secrets in the Scholomans, amongst the mountains
over Lake Hermonstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the records are such
words as Stragochica, Witch, Ordog, and Pocol, Satan and Hell, and in one manuscript this very
Dracula is spoken of as Vampire, which we all understand too well. There have been from the
loins of this very one great man and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth, where alone
this foulness can dwell. For it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep
in all good. In soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest. Whilst they were talking,
Mr Morris was looking steadily at the window, and he now got up quietly and went out of the room.
There was a little pause, and then the professor went on. And now we must settle what we do.
We have here much data, and we must proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiry
of Jonathan that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which were delivered
at Carfax. We also know that at least some of these boxes have been removed. It seems to me
that our first step should be to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look today, or whether any more have been removed. If the latter, we must trace.
Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside the house came the sound of a pistol shot.
The glass of the window was shattered with a bullet, which ricocheting from the top of
the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their
feet. Lord Godelming flew over to the window and threw up the sash. As he did so, we heard Mr
Morris' voice without, Sorry, I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about it.
A minute later, he came in and said, It was an idiotic thing of me to do,
and I ask your pardon, Mrs Harker, most sincerely. I fear I must have frightened you terribly.
But the fact is that whilst the Professor was talking, there came a big bat and sat on the
windowsill. I have got such a horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot
stand them, and I went out to have a shot, as I have been doing late of evenings, whenever I
have seen one. You used to laugh at me for it then, Art. Did you hit it? asked Dr Van Helsing.
I don't know. I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood. Without saying any more, he took his
seat, and the Professor began to resume his statement. We must trace each of these boxes,
and when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair, or we must,
so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safely in it. Thus, in the end,
we may find him in his form of man between the hours of noon and sunset, and so engage with him
when he is at his most weak. And now for you, Madame Mina, this night is end, until all be well.
You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part tonight, you no more must question.
We are men and are able to bear, but you must be our star and our hope, and we shall act all the
more free that you are not in danger, such as we are. All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved,
but it did not seem to me good that they should brave danger and perhaps lessen their safety,
strength being the best safety, through care of me. But their minds were made up,
and though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow, I could say nothing,
save to accept their chivalrous care of me. Mr Morris resumed the discussion.
As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right now. Time is everything
with him, and swift action on our part may save another victim. I own that my heart began to fail
me when the time fraction came so close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear
that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of their
counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carthax with means to get into the house.
Manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep, as if a woman can sleep when those she loves are
in danger. I shall lie down and pretend to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he
returns. Dr Seward's diary, 1st October 4am. Just as we were about to leave the house,
an urgent message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see him at once,
as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me. I told the messenger to say that I
would attend to his wishes in the morning. I was busy just at the moment. The attendant added,
He seems very importunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I don't know but what,
if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his violent fits.
I knew the man would not have said this without some cause, so I said,
All right, I'll go now, and I asked the others to wait a few minutes for me,
as I had to go and see my patient.
Take me with you, friends John, said the professor. His case in your diary interests me much,
and it had bearing too now and again on our case. I should much like to see him,
and especially when his mind is disturbed. May I come along also? asked Lord Godalming.
Me too, said Quincy Morris. May I come, said Harker. I nodded, and we all went down the
passage together. We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational
in his speech and manner than I had ever seen him. There was an unusual understanding of himself,
which was unlike anything I had ever seen in a lunatic, and he took it for granted that his
reasons would prevail, with others entirely sane. We all five went into the room, but none of the
first said anything. His request was that I would at once release him from the asylum
and send him home. This he backed up with arguments regarding his complete recovery,
and deducing his own existing sanity. I appealed to your friends, he said. They will perhaps not
mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you have not introduced me.
I was so much astonished that the oddness of introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike
me at the moment, and besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much
of the habit of equality, that I at once made the introduction, Lord Godelming, Professor Van
Helsing, Mr Quincy Morris of Texas, Mr Jonathan Harker, Mr Renfield. He shook hands with each of
them, saying in turn, Lord Godelming, I had the honour of seconding your father at the Wyndham.
I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no more. He was a man loved and honoured
by all who knew him, and in his youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch,
much patronised on Derby night. Mr Morris, you should be proud of your great state.
Its reception into the Union was a precedent which may have far-reaching effects hereafter,
when the Pole and the Tropic may hold alliance for the Stars and Stripes. The power of treaty may
yet prove a vast engine of enlargement, when the Monroe Doctrine takes its true place in the
fable. What shall any man say of his pleasure at meeting Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apology for
dropping all forms of conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionised therapeutics by his
discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter, conventional forms are unfitting,
since they would seem to limit him to one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality,
by heredity, or by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective places in the
world. I do not need to witness that I am sane, as at least the majority of men are in full
possession of their liberties. And I am sure that you, Dr Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist,
as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to be considered
as under exceptional circumstances. He made this last appeal with a courtly air of conviction,
which was not without its own charm. I think we were all staggered. For my own part,
I was under the conviction, despite my knowledge of the man's character and history,
that his reason had been restored, and I felt under a strong impulse to tell him that I was
satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the
morning. I thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable. So I contented myself with
making a general statement that he appeared to be improving very rapidly, that I would have a longer
chat with him in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction of meeting his
wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said quickly, But I fear, Dr Seward, that you
hardly apprehend my wish. I desire to go at once, here, now, this very hour, this very moment, if I
may. Time presses, and in our implied agreement with the old Seidman, it is of the essence of
the contract. I am sure it is only necessary to put before so admirable a practitioner as Dr Seward,
so simple, yet so momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment. He looked at me keenly, and seeing the
negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any
sufficient response, he went on, Is it possible I have erred in my supposition? You have, I said
frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally. There was a considerable pause, and then he said
Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let me ask for this concession, boon,
privilege, whatever you will. I am content to implore in such a case, not on personal grounds,
but for the sake of others. I am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons, but you may,
I assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, unsound and unselfish, and spring from the
highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the
animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends.
Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a growing conviction that this sudden change of his entire
intellectual method was but yet another phase of his madness, and so determined to let him go on
a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away
in the end. Van Helsing was gazing at him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows
almost meeting with the fixed concentration of his look. He said to Renfield, in a tone which
did not surprise me at the time, but only when I thought of it afterwards, for it was as of one
addressing an equal, Can you not tell, frankly, your real reason for wishing to be free tonight?
I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me, a stranger without prejudice, and with a habit
of keeping an open mind, Dr. Seward will give you, at his own risk and his own responsibility,
the privilege you seek. He shook his head sadly, and with a look of poignant regret on his face,
the professor went on, Come sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest
degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity
we have reason to doubt, since you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very
defect. If you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we perform the
duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise and help us, and if we can we shall aid you to
achieve your wish. He still shook his head, as he said, Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say.
Your argument is complete, and if I were free to speak, I should not hesitate a moment, but I am
not my own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility
does not rest with me. I thought it was now time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically
grave, so I went towards the door, simply saying, Come my friends, we have work to do. Good night.
As, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient. He moved towards me so
quickly that for the moment I feared he was about to make another homicidal attack.
My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly and made his petition
in a moving manner. As he saw that the very excess of his emotion was mitigating against him,
by storing us more to our old relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes, so it became a little more fixed in my manner,
if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing.
I had previously seen something of the same constantly growing excitement in him when he
had to make some request of which at the time he had thought much, such for instance as when he
wanted a cat, and I was prepared to see the collapse into the same sullen acquiescence
on this occasion. My expectation was not realized, for when he found that his appeal would not be
successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself onto his knees and held up his
hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a torrent of entreaty with the
tears rolling down his cheeks and his whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion.
Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward. Oh, let me implore you to let me out of this house at once.
Send me away, how you will and where you will. Send keepers with me, with whips and chains.
Let them take me in a straight waistcoat, manacled and leg-ind, even to jail. But let me go out of
this. You don't know what you do by keeping me here. I'm speaking from the depths of my heart,
of my very soul. You don't know whom you wrong, or how, and I may not tell. Woe is me, I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred, by all you hold dear, by your love that is lost, by your hope that lives,
for the sake of the Almighty, take me out of this and save my soul from guilt. Can't you hear me,
man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I am sane and earnest now,
that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! Hear me!
Let me go! Let me go! Let me go! I thought that the longer this went on, the wilder he would get.
And so would bring on a fit. So I took him by the hand and raised him up.
Come, I said sternly, no more of this. We have had quite enough already.
Get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly. He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for
several moments. Then, without a word, he rose and, moving over, sat down on the side of the bed.
The collapse had come, as on former occasions, just as I had expected. When I was leaving the
room, last of our party, he said to me, in a quiet, well-bred voice,
You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind,
later on, that I did what I could to convince you to night.